.Dd December 28, 2016
.Dt WDCOBJ 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wdcobj
.Nd Examine WDC object modules
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl DLRS
.Ar objfile
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility provides a means to examine object modules created by the 
.Nm WDCxAS
assembler. 
.Nm
will print out the size and type of each section defined in the module, the
names of all symbols defined or referenced by the object module, and if
desired, each of the data records in the file. The
.Nm
utility is of limited usefulness to the typical programmer and is included
for completeness. Options allow control of the information displayed.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl D
This option causes display of any source debug information records present
in the object module. The appropriate options must have been specified when
compiling or assembling for debug information to be present. The default is
to NOT display debug information.
.It Fl L
Normally, when the records are displayed, all the data in the record is
displayed in hexadecimal format. When option 
.Fl L
is specified, the data in the record is not displayed. This option is useful
for examining the structure of a file without displaying all the individual
data.
.Pp
To examine the individual records in an object module but without seeing all
of the data bytes, use the command:
.Pp
.Dl Nm Fl L Ar PROG.OBJ
.Pp
.It Fl R
This option causes display of each of the individual records in the object
module. Information about the object file format is available on request.
.Pp
To examine the individual records in an object module, use the command:
.Pp
.Dl Nm Fl R Ar PROG.OBJ
.Pp
.It Fl S
Normally, when
.Nm
is run, the information for the sections is followed by the symbol
information. When the 
.Fl S
option is specified, the symbol information is suppressed.
.Pp
The following command displays just the section names and types of all
modules in the file 
.Ar PROG.OBJ :
.Pp
.Dl Nm Fl S Ar PROG.OBJ
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr wdc02as 1 ,
.Xr wdc02cc 1 ,
.Xr wdc02op 1 ,
.Xr wdc816as 1 ,
.Xr wdc816cc 1 ,
.Xr wdc816op 1 ,
.Xr wdcdb 1 ,
.Xr wdcln 1 ,
.Xr wdclib 1 ,
.\" .Xr wdcobj 1 ,
.Xr wdcsym 1
